Now let’s look at the RIP protocol in more detail and troubleshoots some issues.
show ip protocols
shows me once again that RIP is running on this router
sending updates every 30 seconds
other timers on each of these routers are not synchronized
so they're not all sending it at exactly the same time.
In this example, the next 1 is due in 21 seconds, invalid of the 180 seconds
this specifies the invalid parameter
when that expires the route is declared invalid
and they're should be at least 3 times the value of the update interval
a route becomes invalid when no updates refresh the route.
In other words, if router 1 doesn’t get an update
about a network from router 2 for a period of 180 seconds
the router's declared invalid.
The route will then enter what's called a holddown timer
and this is when a route is marked as inaccessible and advertises unreachable.
However, the router will still forward packets in its routing table
even if they're marked as inaccessible
so traffic will be forwarded during the holddown interval
a route is only flushed after this timer expires
in other words, it's removed from the routing table
after the expiry of the flush timer.
We can look at the RIP database
These are the routes that RIP has learned about
notice it includes automatic summary routes
The RIP database can be different to the routing table
when multiple routing protocols are used
EIGRP, as an example, will take precedence over RIP
and EIGRP routes will be preferred over RIP if there are conflicts
so EIGRP routes will be put into the routing table in preference of RIP routes.
Now automatic summarization is a problem when you have discontiguous subnets.
So on router 3
I’m going to create another loopback of 1.1.1.2/32
router 1 has a loopback of 1.1.1.1/32
and now router 3 has a loopback of 1.1.1.2/32
I’m going to advertise that into RIP
this is going to cause a problem now because on router 2
when we use the show ip route command
you'll see that router 2 see's 2 paths to get to network 1.0.0.0/8
it thinks it can get to 1.0.0.0/8 via router 1 and router 3
so in some cases the problem you're going to have
is that when router 2 wants to ping 1.1.1.1 as an example
it will send some packets to router 1 and some packets to router 3
because it thinks it has 2 ways to get to the destination network.
On router 1, as an example, if I try and ping 1.1.1.2 that doesn’t work.
On router 1 if I use the command show ip route
I can see the routing table
it hasn’t learned about the network 1.1.1.1
this can cause all kinds of problems in your network.
So, what you should do to solve this is going to the RIP process
and type no auto-summary this does affect EIGRP in a similar way.
So with EIGRP also want to disable automatic summarization
so I'll disable automatic summarization on all these routers
and now when I use the command show ip route.
I should see more specific routes.
So notice now I’m seeing 2.2.2.2/32
I’m still seeing the old 2 network which was advertised previously.
So when if I type clear ip route *
that allows me to remove all routes from the routing table
and force an update so that I don’t have to wait for routes to expire
and then be relearned and notice now I see 1.1.1.1 on router 1
as directly connected, so it’s the loopback of router 1
Now I also see 1.1.1.2 advertise via router 2, 10.1.1.2
so now router 1 should be able to ping
the loopback of router 3 with this IP address.
So I have added this loopback to router 3
and that now works and on route 3
we should be able to ping router's 1 loopback
that works and on router 2 when I use the command show ip route
I see specific routes via different interfaces.
So 1.1.1.1 is available via F0/0 this interface
1.1.1.2 is available via F0/1 this interface.
This is a lot better than it was previously.
So the moral of the story is when you setup RIP
make sure that you disable automatic summarization
and ensure that you use version 2
otherwise, you're going to have problems in a lot of topologies.